+++
title = "Specular Cube (Texture7) - WIP"
weight = 6
+++
Specular cube maps simulate the specular reflections of a model's environment

Each stage has its own cube map for specular reflections that can be accessed from materials as 
the special value "#replace_cubemap". Specular cube maps can also use cube maps in the model folder 
for special effects that don't vary between stages similar to [diffuse cube maps](../difcube/).

## Specular Roughness 
**TODO: Show corresponding roughness and metal shader render for each mip level**  
Unlike normal cube map textures, specular cube maps have mipmaps. The mipmaps simulate the 
appearance of environment reflections at different roughness levels. Stage cube maps are typically 
16x16 pixels. The base mipmap is the full 16x16 pixels and corresponds to the detailed reflections for a roughness of 0. 
The last mipmap has a size of 1x1 and simulates the blurry reflections for a roughness of 1. Roughness values in between 0 and 1 
blend between mip levels to create appropriately detailed or blurry reflections. 
In the [PRM Demo](../prm/), set metalness to 1.0 and notice how the training stage becomes less visible when increasing roughness from 0 to 1.  

```glsl
float RoughnessToLod(float roughness) {
    // Applies a curves adjustment to roughness.
    // Clamp roughness to avoid divide by 0.
    float r = max(roughness, 0.01);
    float r2 = r * r;
    return log2((1.0 / r2) * 2.0 - 2.0) * -0.4545 + 4.0;
}
```

## Creating Specular Cube Maps
The base mip level can be baked using traditional methods for creating cube maps or 
*The mip levels should be not created by hand and must be generated by an appropriate tool to create accurate results*.  

For best results, specular cube maps should use floating point formats since they can encode HDR (high dynamic range) lighting data. 
This gives improved lighting quality when used with PBR materials like in Smash Ultimate. Floating point cube maps can achieve similar quality to an HDRI in Maya or Blender. Specular cube maps in Smash Ultimate do not affect diffuse lighting, however.  
**TODO: show difference between HDR and SDR cube maps**  

## Limitations
Materials in Smash Ultimate can only reference a single stage specific cube map at a time using the "#replace_cubemap" value. 
This means the lighting will only be correct for the single point in space used to bake the cube map. Stage models can use 
their own model specific cube maps to improve the accuracy of the reflections. This doesn't benefit models that appear on multiple stages like fighters or items.  

The floating point format used for HDR lighting improves lighting quality at the cost of greatly increased file sizes. Attempting to increase the cube map size beyond 16x16 may cause memory and stability issues in graphically demanding scenarios. Note that cube map resolution mostly affects materials with low roughness values, since rough surfaces will use higher mip levels with smaller dimensions.